## Introduction

This report from the DNS Abuse Special Interest Group (SIG) at FIRST provides advice for incident response teams responding to incidents involving DNS abuse. Crisply defining the edges of what is and is not DNS abuse is a challenge. Many organizations have weighed in on defining DNS abuse as relating to some combination of phishing, malware, unsolicited email, botnets, fraud, or a combination of some or all of these abuse types. The FIRST DNS Abuse SIG has recognized a gap in this conversation, which is that these categories do not give actionable advice to incident responders. This report therefore aims to complement existing efforts in DNS abuse studies by providing common examples of techniques used in incidents that responders and security teams see, and providing a stakeholder list for who might be able to help the incident responders detect, mitigate, or prevent specific techniques used for abuse.

The advice currently takes the form of a matrix indicating whether a specific stakeholder can directly help with a specific technique. By “help”, we mean whether the stakeholder is in a position to detect, mitigate, or prevent the abuse technique. We have organized this information under three spreadsheets covering these incident response actions. For example, during an incident involving DNS cache poisoning, the team can go to the mitigation tab and look at the row for DNS cache poisoning, to find which stakeholders they might be able to contact to help mitigate the incident.

The DNS ecosystem is complex, with many stakeholders and operating models. Some of the techniques listed may have benign uses, so it's not as simple as “these techniques should never be allowed”. However, in the context of incident response, the assumption is that an incident is occurring, so therefore whatever techniques the adversary used to initiate or maintain that incident are malicious or are against the security policy of the organization, or both. Incident responders should adhere to responsible collection within their jurisdictional boundaries. The DNS Abuse SIG is agnostic as to whether any of the listed techniques are abusive of the DNS in general. This report is composed from the point of view of assuming that a technique is used maliciously in the particular incident, and therefore bringing to light who can take action by detecting, mitigating, or preventing.

Some techniques may be used in parallel with attacks involving the DNS;for example, BGP hijacking or TLS certificate impersonation. Such techniques are out of scope, this document focuses just on DNS abuse techniques.

It could be useful to note that there are other policy-related, governmental, and judicial avenues that can be contacted in response to an incident, which as of this version of the document haven't been included. For example, The Budapest Convention and other international instruments provide a mechanism for both evidence retrieval and suspension of infrastructure across country borders. The first step for a foreign law enforcement investigator will often be an informal preservation request, to ensure that data is not lost pending a formal legal request (that is, a Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty request).
