## Terms

The three dimensions of the matrix (action, technique, and stakeholder) use the following definitions of terms.

### Actions

The definitions are linked to the FIRST CSIRT services framework v2.1, for services that a CSIRT might provide.

Detect – identify potential incidents. Services: Monitoring and Detection; Incident Report Acceptance. Note: The phase of incident management where the IR team wants to confirm and gather additional detection tools and signatures is part of the Mitigation phase, not Detection. The Detection action focuses only on initial detection of the incident.

Mitigate – contain an incident and restore secure operations. Services: Mitigation and Recovery.

Prevent – using DNS-specific steps, make it less likely incidents of this type will occur in the future. Services: Knowledge transfer (including to internal IT teams); Vulnerability Response; also relates to detection (possibly updating the signatures and detection rules) and recovery (during recovery, should the system be reconfigured to prevent recurrence). Note that broad anti-malware prevention is out of scope. Of course everyone should do the broad anti-malware practices, see for example Best Practices | M3AAWG.

### Techniques

DGA domains (Domain Generation Algorithms / the domains generated by those algorithms) – https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1568/002/

Domain name compromise – The wrongfully taking control of a domain name from the rightful name holder. Compromised domains can be used for different kinds of malicious activity like sending spam or phishing, for distributing malware or as botnet command and control - https://www.icann.org/groups/ssac/documents/sac-007-en.

Lame delegations – Lame delegations occur as a result of expired nameserver domains allowing attackers to take control of the domain resolution by re-registering this expired nameserver domain - https://blog.apnic.net/2021/03/16/the-prevalence-persistence-perils-of-lame-nameservers/.

DNS cache poisoning – also known as DNS spoofing, is a type of cyber attack in which an attacker corrupts a DNS resolver's cache by injecting false DNS records, causing the resolver to records controlled by the attacker - https://capec.mitre.org/data/definitions/142.html

DNS rebinding – a type of attack where a malicious website directs a client to a local network address, allowing the attacker to bypass the same-origin policy and gain access to the victim's local resources - https://capec.mitre.org/data/definitions/275.html

DNS server compromise – Attacker gains administrative privileges on an open recursive DNS server, authoritative DNS server, organizational recursive DNS server, or ISP-operated recursive DNS server.

Stub resolver hijacking – The attacker compromises the Operating System of a computer or a phone with malicious code that intercepts and responds to DNS queries with rogue or malicious responses

Local recursive resolver hijacking – Consumer Premise Equipment (CPE), such as home routers, often provide DNS recursion on the local network. If the CPE device is compromised, the attacker can change the recursive resolver behavior; for example, by changing responses.

On-path DNS attack – “Attackers intercept communication between a user and a DNS server and provide different destination IP addresses pointing to malicious sites.” (https://www.imperva.com/learn/application-security/dns-hijacking-redirection/)

DoS against the DNS – Multiple systems sending malicious traffic to a target at the same time, or attacks against individual targets that prevent DNS service being provided.

DNS as a vector for DoS – "Adversaries may attempt to cause a denial of service by reflecting a high-volume of network traffic to a target. This type of Network DoS takes advantage of a third-party server intermediary that hosts and will respond to a given spoofed source IP address. This third-party server is commonly termed a reflector. An adversary accomplishes a reflection attack by sending packets to reflectors with the spoofed address of the victim.” “Two prominent protocols that have enabled Reflection Amplification Floods are DNS and NTP though the use of several others in the wild have been documented." These Reflection and Amplification Floods can be directed against components of the DNS, like authoritative nameservers, rendering them unresponsive. (https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1498/002/)

Obfuscation via Dynamic DNS – Adversaries may dynamically establish connections to command and control infrastructure to evade common detections and remediations. This may be achieved by using malware that shares a common algorithm with the infrastructure the adversary uses to receive the malware's communications. These calculations can be used to dynamically adjust parameters such as the domain name, IP address, or port number the malware uses for command and control. (https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1568/)

Fast flux – “Adversaries may use Fast Flux DNS to hide a command and control channel behind an array of rapidly changing IP addresses linked to a single domain resolution. This technique uses a fully qualified domain name with multiple IP addresses assigned to it which are swapped with high frequency using a combination of round robin IP addressing and short Time-To-Live (TTL) for a DNS resource record.” (https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1568/001/) "Double fast flux" is where both A/AAAA and NS records are updated to further hide malicious activity.

Infiltration and exfiltration via the DNS – Exfiltration via the DNS requires a delegated domain or, if the domain does not exist in the public DNS, the operation of a resolver preloaded with that domain's zone file information and configured to receive and respond to the queries sent by the compromised devices.

Malicious registration of (effective) second level domains – For example, before attacking a victim, adversaries purchase or register domains from an ICANN-accredited registrar that can be used during targeting. See also CAPEC-630.

Creation of malicious subdomains under dynamic DNS providers – Before attacking a victim, adversaries purchase or create domains from an entity other than a registrar or registry that provides subdomains under domains they own and control. See also https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_DNS.

Compromise of a non-DNS server to conduct abuse – Internet attack infrastructure is a broad category, and this covers any non-DNS server. Many compromised servers, such as web servers or mail servers, interact with the DNS or may be instrumental in conducting DNS abuse. For example, compromised mail servers are one technique that may be used to send phishing emails.

Use of an unregistered domain – In a context where a domain name is expected (such as the From header in mail or a URL in a web page or message body), supplying a domain name not controlled by the attacker and that is not controlled by or registered to a legitimate registrant.

Spoofing of a registered domain – In a context where a domain name is expected (such as the From header in mail or a URL in a web page or message body), supplying a domain name not controlled by the attacker and that is in fact controlled by or registered to a legitimate registrant.

DNS tunneling - tunneling another protocol over DNS – “The DNS protocol serves an administrative function in computer networking and thus may be very common in environments. DNS traffic may also be allowed even before network authentication is completed. DNS packets contain many fields and headers in which data can be concealed. Often known as DNS tunneling, adversaries may abuse DNS to communicate with systems under their control within a victim network while also mimicking normal expected traffic.” (https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1071/004/)

DNS beacons - C2 communication – Successive or periodic DNS queries to a command & control server, either to exfiltrate data or await further commands from the C2.

### Stakeholders

Many organizations may act in different stakeholder roles at different times. At small and midsize organizations, the same individual may act in different roles at different times. However, these different stakeholders have distinct capabilities and so we have organized them as separate. Even if one organization has different teams that act as different stakeholder roles, it may be helpful to attempt to contact the relevant team that performs a stakeholder capability.

It is important for incident responders to be mindful that not every stakeholder will have their best interests at heart. Contacted stakeholders may be distracted, immature, or at worst intentionally operating infrastructure to support abuse. Organizations doing the last will be unreceptive at best and deceptive at worst. If you are unsure about whether to proceed with contacting a stakeholder, check with your peers.

Registrars – an organization that allows registration of domains under a TLD - https://www.icann.org/en/icann-acronyms-and-terms/registrar-en

Registries – organizations responsible for maintaining the database of domains for a TLD - https://www.icann.org/en/icann-acronyms-and-terms/registry-en

Authoritative Operators – https://www.icann.org/en/icann-acronyms-and-terms/authoritative-name-server-en. In the context of this document, mitigation and prevention refers to the primary authoritative server.

Domain name resellers – https://www.icann.org/resources/pages/reseller-2013-05-03-en

Recursive Operators – Organizations operating either a private or public recursive resolver

Network Operators – Organizations operating an autonomous system (AS). We assume an organization with this capability is not running a recursive DNS server. This column means netflow and BGP data, and excludes (as a matter of a clarity choice here) passive DNS.

Application Service Provider – Software as a Service provider (like Google Docs), see https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso-iec:17788:ed-1:v1:en for SaaS definition.

Hosting Provider – A company that provides Internet hosting services. "An Internet hosting service is a service that runs servers connected to the Internet, allowing organizations and individuals to serve content or host services connected to the Internet." See details: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_hosting_service

NOTE; If the hosting provider is a bulletproof hosting provider or otherwise complicit in providing attack infrastructure, then at best there is no good that will come from contacting them and at worst it will expose the team to reprisals.

Threat Intelligence Provider – Threat intelligence providers aggregate, transform, analyze, interpret, or enrich intelligence to provide the necessary context for decision-making processes. CTI is considered as sharing and analysis only.

Device, OS, & Application Software Developers – Software developers who write the code or develop DNS resolver software or are responsible for updating an imported DNS resolver version in their software project.

Domain Registrants – “an individual or entity who registers a domain name” https://www.icann.org/en/icann-acronyms-and-terms/registrant-en. In the case of the malicious registration rows, this stakeholder is modeled as the actual human who made the malicious registration.

End User – Everyone who uses the Internet (who is not performing one of the other stakeholder capabilities listed).

Law Enforcement and Public Safety Authorities – Government organizations with authority to enforce laws or act in the public interest. Such organizations typically become aware of an issue because of:

Ongoing investigation in which LE technique gives unique insight.

Victim complaints provide information indicating the abuse, often relying upon collaboration with technical SMEs to help the organization understand the evidence.

CSIRTs - Computer Security Incident Response Teams. A Computer Security Incident Response Team is an organizational unit (which may be virtual) or a capability that provides services and support to a defined constituency for preventing, detecting, handling, and responding to computer security incidents, in accordance with its mission. (Taken from the Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT) Services Framework v2.1) Each CSIRT can also be an end user of services, a registrant, threat intel provider, etc. When the CSIRT (organization) is performing those stakeholder capabilities, use respective columns. This column models exclusively the capability of the team.

Incident responder – The Computer Security Incident Response Team that is internal to the impacted organization.
